Description of AnnData contents (#157)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs: docs/sce_file_contents.md

# Single-cell gene expression file contents

> Single-cell or single-nuclei gene expression data (unfiltered, filtered, or processed) is provided for use with R as an RDS file containing a [`SingleCellExperiment` object](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.13/OSCA.intro/the-singlecellexperiment-class.html) or with python as an HDF5 file containing an [`AnnData` object](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).

Reviewer: Would this be a little easier to consume with nested bullets? For example (apologies for almost-certainly-bad suggestion spacing...)

```suggestion
Single-cell or single-nuclei gene expression data (unfiltered, filtered, or processed) is provided in two formats:
  - As an RDS file containing a [`SingleCellExperiment` object](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.13/OSCA.intro/the-singlecellexperiment-class.html) for use in R
 - An HDF5 file containing an [`AnnData` object](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) for use in Python
```

> These objects contain the expression data, cell and gene metrics, associated metadata, and, in the case of multimodal data like ADTs from CITE-seq experiments, data from additional cell-based assays.

Reviewer: I feel like we should indicate more clearly that ADT & RNA data are in separate hdf5 files, but maybe this section isn't the right spot for that information!

> Note that multiplexed sample libraries are only available as `SingleCellExperiment` objects, and are not currently available as `AnnData` objects.

Reviewer: (if emojis are kosher for our style here!)

# Single-cell gene expression file contents

Single-cell or single-nuclei gene expression data (unfiltered, filtered, or processed) is provided in two formats:
  - As an RDS file containing a [`SingleCellExperiment` object](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.13/OSCA.intro/the-singlecellexperiment-class.html) for use in R.
  - An HDF5 file containing an [`AnnData` object](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) for use in Python.

These objects contain the expression data, cell and gene metrics, associated metadata, and, in the case of multimodal data like ADTs from CITE-seq experiments, data from additional cell-based assays.
For `SingleCellExperiment` objects, the ADT data will be included as an alternative experiment in the same object containing the primary RNA data.
For `AnnData` objects, the ADT data will be available as a separate object stored in a separate file.
Note that multiplexed sample libraries are only available as `SingleCellExperiment` objects, and are not currently available as `AnnData` objects.

Below we present some details about the specific contents of the objects we provide.

## Components of a `SingleCellExperiment` object

> Before getting started, we highly encourage you to familiarize yourself with the general `SingleCellExperiment` object structure and functions available as part of the [`SingleCellExperiment` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.13/bioc/html/SingleCellExperiment.html) from Bioconductor.

Reviewer 2: I just updated to `3.17`, which is what we are using now, but maybe `release` so we don't have to update it again? We should generally make sure any other bioconductor links are consistent.
```suggestion
Before getting started, we highly encourage you to familiarize yourself with the general `SingleCellExperiment` object structure and functions available as part of the [`SingleCellExperiment` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.17/bioc/html/SingleCellExperiment.html) from Bioconductor.
```

The following command can be used to access the PCA results:

```r

> pca <- reducedDim(sce, "PCA")

Reviewer 2: I don't know how I feel about the assignment additions. I feel like the bare command was sufficient and probably preferred in many contexts.

```

UMAP results were calculated using `scater::runUMAP()`, with the PCA results as input rather than the full gene expression matrix.
The following command can be used to access the UMAP results:

```r

> umap <- reducedDim(sce,"UMAP")

Reviewer 2: Noting missing space, but I would lose the `umap <- ` as well per earlier comments.
```suggestion
umap <- reducedDim(sce, "UMAP")
```

```

### Additional `SingleCellExperiment` components for CITE-seq libraries (with ADT tags)

ADT data from CITE-seq experiments, when present, is included within the `SingleCellExperiment` as an "Alternative Experiment" named `"adt"` , which can be accessed with the following command:

```r
adt_data <- altExp(sce, "adt")
```

Within this, the main expression matrix is again found in the `counts` assay and the normalized expression matrix is found in the `logcounts` assay.
For each assay, each column corresponds to a cell or droplet (in the same order as the parent `SingleCellExperiment`) and each row corresponds to an antibody derived tag (ADT).
Column names are again cell barcode sequences and row names are the antibody targets for each ADT.

> Note that only cells which are denoted as "Keep" in  the `colData(sce)$adt_scpca_filter` column (as described [above](#singlecellexperiment-singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)) have normalized expression values in the `logcounts` assay, and all other cells are assigned `NA` values.

Reviewer 2: Looks like some double `singlecellexperiment-` insertions happened?
```suggestion
Note that only cells which are denoted as "Keep" in  the `colData(sce)$adt_scpca_filter` column (as described [above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)) have normalized expression values in the `logcounts` assay, and all other cells are assigned `NA` values.
```

However, as described in the {ref}`processed ADT data section <processing_information:Processed ADT data>`, normalization may fail under certain circumstances, in which case there will be no `logcounts` normalized expression matrix present in the alternative experiment.

> The following additional per-cell data columns for the ADT data can be found in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(sce)` [as above](#singlecellexperiment-singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following additional per-cell data columns for the ADT data can be found in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(sce)` [as above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)).
```

| `target_type` | Whether each ADT is a target (`target`), negative/isotype control (`neg_control`), or positive control (`pos_control`). If this information was not provided, all ADTs will have been considered targets and will be labeled as `target` |

Finally, additional metadata for ADT processing can be found in the metadata slot of the alternative experiment.

> This metadata slot has the same contents as the [parent experiment metadata](#singlecellexperiment-experiment-metadata), along with one additional field, `ambient_profile`, which holds a list of representing the ambient concentrations of each ADT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This metadata slot has the same contents as the [parent experiment metadata](#singlecellexperiment-experiment-metadata), along with one additional field, `ambient_profile`, which holds a list of the ambient concentrations of each ADT.
```

```r
adt_metadata <- metadata(altExp(sce, "adt"))
```

### Additional `SingleCellExperiment` components for multiplexed libraries

Multiplexed libraries will contain a number of additional components and fields.

Hashtag oligo (HTO) quantification for each cell is included within the `SingleCellExperiment` as an "Alternative Experiment" named `"cellhash"` , which can be accessed with the following command:

```r
hto_data <- altExp(sce, "cellhash")
```

Within this, the main data matrix is again found in the `counts` assay, with each column corresponding to a cell or droplet (in the same order as the parent `SingleCellExperiment`) and each row corresponding to a hashtag oligo (HTO).
Column names are again cell barcode sequences and row names the HTO ids for all assayed HTOs.

> The following additional per-cell data columns for the cellhash data can be found in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(sce)` [as above](#singlecellexperiment-singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following additional per-cell data columns for the cellhash data can be found in the main `colData` data frame (accessed with `colData(sce)` [as above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)).
```

Genetic demultiplexing statistics are found in the main `colData(sce)` data frame, with the prefix `vireo_`.

## Components of an `AnnData` object

Before getting started, we highly encourage you to familiarize yourself with the general `AnnData` object structure and functions available as part of the [`AnnData` package](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).
For the most part, the `AnnData` objects that we provide are formatted to match the expected data format for [`CELLxGENE`](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/) following [schema version `3.0.0`](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md).

To begin, you will need to load the `AnnData` package and read the HDF5 file:

```python
import anndata
adata_object = anndata.read_h5ad("SCPCL000000_processed.rds")

> ```

Reviewer: don't these have an `_rna` suffix?

| `age`             | Age at time sample was obtained                                |
| `sex`             | Sex of patient that the sample was obtained from               |
| `diagnosis`       | Tumor type                                                     |
| `subdiagnosis`    | Subcategory of diagnosis or mutation status (if applicable)    |
| `tissue_location` | Where in the body the tumor sample was located                 |
| `disease_timing`  | At what stage of disease the sample was obtained, either diagnosis or recurrence |
| `organism`         | The organism the sample was obtained from (e.g., `Homo_sapiens`) |
| `development_stage_ontology_term_id` | [`HsapDv` ontology](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/hsapdv.html) term indicating developmental stage. If unavailable, `unknown` is used.  |
| `sex_ontology_term_id` | [`PATO`](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/pato.html) term referring to the sex of the sample. If unavailable, `unknown` is used. |
| `organism_ontology_id` | [NCBI taxonomy](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy) term for organism, e.g. [`NCBITaxon:9606`](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/NCBITaxon_9606). |

> | `self_reported_ethnicity_ontology_term_id` | For _Homo sapiens_, a [`Hancestro` term](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/hancestro.html). `multiethnic` indicates more than one ethnicity is reported. `unknown` indicates unavailable ethnicity and `NA` is used for all other organisms.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `self_reported_ethnicity_ontology_term_id` | For _Homo sapiens_, a [`Hancestro` term](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/hancestro.html). `multiethnic` indicates more than one ethnicity is reported. `unknown` indicates unavailable ethnicity, and `NA` is used for all other organisms.  |
```

| `disease_ontology_term_id` | [`MONDO`](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/mondo.html) term indicating disease type. [`PATO:0000461`](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0000461) indicates normal or healthy tissue. If unavailable, `NA` is used.  |
| `tissue_ontology_term_id`| [`UBERON`](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/uberon.html) term indicating tissue of origin. If unavailable, `NA` is used. |

> | `is_primary_data` | Set to `FALSE` for all libraries to reflect that all libraries were obtained from external investigators.Required by `CEllxGENE`             |

Reviewer: That said, I feel like this doesn't belong in our docs? Or if it does, a lot more columns are also required by czi!

Metrics for each of the ADTs assayed can be found as a `pandas.DataFrame` in the `.var` slot within the `AnnData` object:

This data frame contains the following columns with statistics for each ADT:

| Column name | Contents                                                       |
| ----------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `mean`      | Mean ADT count across all cells/droplets                       |
| `detected`  | Percent of cells in which the ADT was detected (ADT count > 0 ) |
| `target_type` | Whether each ADT is a target (`target`), negative/isotype control (`neg_control`), or positive control (`pos_control`). If this information was not provided, all ADTs will have been considered targets and will be labeled as `target` |

Finally, additional metadata for ADT processing can be found in the `.uns` slot of the `AnnData` object.
This metadata slot has the same contents as the [RNA experiment metadata](#anndata-experiment-metadata), along with one additional field, `ambient_profile`, which holds a list of representing the ambient concentrations of each ADT.

```r
adt_metadata <- metadata(altExp(sce, "adt"))

> ```

Reviewer: this isn't anndata

Genetic demultiplexing statistics are found in the main `colData(sce)` data frame, with the prefix `vireo_`.

## Components of an `AnnData` object

Before getting started, we highly encourage you to familiarize yourself with the general `AnnData` object structure and functions available as part of the [`AnnData` package](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).
For the most part, the `AnnData` objects that we provide are formatted to match the expected data format for [`CELLxGENE`](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/) following [schema version `3.0.0`](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md).

To begin, you will need to load the `AnnData` package and read the HDF5 file:

```python
import anndata

> adata_object = anndata.read_h5ad("SCPCL000000_processed_rna.hdf5")

Reviewer 2: This assignment makes sense, but I would leave out the others.

```

### `AnnData` expression counts

The data matrix, `X`, of the `AnnData` object for single-cell and single-nuclei experiments contains the primary RNA-seq expression data as integer counts in both the unfiltered (`_unfiltered_rna.hdf5`) and filtered (`_filtered_rna.hdf5`) objects.
The data is stored as a sparse matrix, and each column represents a cell or droplet, each row a gene.
Column names are cell barcode sequences and row names are Ensembl gene IDs.
The `X` matrix can be accessed with the following python code:

```python

> raw_count_matrix = adata_obj.X

Reviewer 2: I think I might mark the values here and below as comments and leave off the assignment.
```suggestion
adata_obj.X # raw count matrix
```

| `age`             | Age at time sample was obtained                                |
| `sex`             | Sex of patient that the sample was obtained from               |
| `diagnosis`       | Tumor type                                                     |
| `subdiagnosis`    | Subcategory of diagnosis or mutation status (if applicable)    |
| `tissue_location` | Where in the body the tumor sample was located                 |
| `disease_timing`  | At what stage of disease the sample was obtained, either diagnosis or recurrence |
| `organism`         | The organism the sample was obtained from (e.g., `Homo_sapiens`) |
| `development_stage_ontology_term_id` | [`HsapDv` ontology](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/hsapdv.html) term indicating developmental stage. If unavailable, `unknown` is used.  |
| `sex_ontology_term_id` | [`PATO`](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/pato.html) term referring to the sex of the sample. If unavailable, `unknown` is used. |
| `organism_ontology_id` | [NCBI taxonomy](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy) term for organism, e.g. [`NCBITaxon:9606`](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/NCBITaxon_9606). |

> | `self_reported_ethnicity_ontology_term_id` | For _Homo sapiens_, a [`Hancestro` term](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/hancestro.html). `multiethnic` indicates more than one ethnicity is reported. `unknown` indicates unavailable ethnicity, and `NA` is used for all other organisms.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `self_reported_ethnicity_ontology_term_id` | For _Homo sapiens_, a [`HANCESTRO` term](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/hancestro.html). `multiethnic` indicates more than one ethnicity is reported. `unknown` indicates unavailable ethnicity, and `NA` is used for all other organisms.  |
```

> | `disease_ontology_term_id` | [`MONDO`](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/mondo.html) term indicating disease type. [`PATO:0000461`](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0000461) indicates normal or healthy tissue. If unavailable, `NA` is used.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `disease_ontology_term_id` | [`Mondo`](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/mondo.html) term indicating disease type. [`PATO:0000461`](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0000461) indicates normal or healthy tissue. If unavailable, `NA` is used.  |
```

> | `tissue_ontology_term_id`| [`UBERON`](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/uberon.html) term indicating tissue of origin. If unavailable, `NA` is used. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tissue_ontology_term_id`| [`Uberon`](http://obofoundry.org/ontology/uberon.html) term indicating tissue of origin. If unavailable, `NA` is used. |
```

### `AnnData` gene information and metrics

Gene information and metrics calculated from the RNA-seq expression data are stored as a `pandas.DataFrame` in the `.var` slot, with the Ensembl ID as the names of the rows.

```python
gene_info = adata_obj.var
```

All of the per-gene data columns included in the `rowData` of the `SingleCellExperiment` objects are present in the `.var` slot of the `AnnData` object.
To see a full description of the included columns, see the [section on gene metrics in `Components of a SingleCellExperiment object`](#singlecellexperiment-gene-information-and-metrics).

The `AnnData` object also includes the following additional gene-level metadata columns:

| Column name   | Contents                                                         |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `is_feature_filtered` | Boolean indicating if the gene or feature is filtered out in the normalized matrix but is present in the raw matrix     |

### `AnnData` experiment metadata

Metadata associated with {ref}`data processing <processing_information:Processing information>` is included in the `.uns` slot as a list.

> ```r

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```python
````

adata_object.uns # experiment metadata
```

All of the object metadata included in `SingleCellExperiment` objects are present in the `.uns` slot of the `AnnData` object.
To see a full description of the included columns, see the [section on experiment metadata in `Components of a SingleCellExperiment object`](#singlecellexperiment-experiment-metadata).
The only exception is that the `AnnData` object _does not_ contain the `sample_metadata` item in the `.uns` slot.
Instead, the contents of the `sample_metadata` data frame are stored in the cell-level metadata (`.obs`).

The `AnnData` object also includes the following additional items in the `.uns` slot:

| Item name   | Contents                                                         |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `schema_version` | CZI schema version used for `AnnData` formatting, `3.0.0` |

Reviewer: can't hurt?

```suggestion
| `schema_version` | CZI schema version used for `AnnData` formatting, [`3.0.0`](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/3.0.0/schema.md) |
```

Reviewer 2: I'd actually just eliminate the version number here, since that is the value inside.
```suggestion
| `schema_version` | CZI schema version used for `AnnData` formatting |
```

### `AnnData` dimensionality reduction results

> In the HDF5 file containing the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object only (`_processed_rna.hdf5`), the `.obsm` slot of the object will be occupied with both principal component analysis (`X_PCA`) and `X_UMAP` results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HDF5 file containing the processed `AnnData` object (`_processed_rna.hdf5`) contains a slot `.obsm` with both principal component analysis (`X_PCA`) and UMAP (`X_UMAP`) results.
```

For all other HDF5 files, the `.obsm` slot will be empty as no dimensionality reduction was performed.

For information on how PCA and UMAP results were calculated see the {ref}`section on processed gene expression data <processing_information:Processed gene expression data>`.

The following command can be used to access the PCA and UMAP results:

```python
adata_object.obsm["X_PCA"] # pca results
adata_object.obsm["X_UMAP"] # umap results
```

### Additional `AnnData` components for CITE-seq libraries (with ADT tags)

> ADT data from CITE-seq experiments, when present, is available as a separate `AnnData` object (`.hdf5` file).

Reviewer: Elsewhere we write `HDF5 file` -

```suggestion
ADT data from CITE-seq experiments, when present, is available as a separate `AnnData` object (HDF5 file).
```

All files containing ADT data will contain the `_adt.hdf5` suffix.

> The data matrix, `X`, of the `AnnData` objects contain the primary ADT expression data as integer counts in both the unfiltered (`_unfiltered_rna.hdf5`) and filtered (`_filtered_rna.hdf5`) objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data matrix, `X`, of the `AnnData` objects contain the primary ADT expression data as integer counts in both the unfiltered (`_unfiltered_adt.hdf5`) and filtered (`_filtered_adt.hdf5`) objects.
```

> Each column corresponds to a cell or droplet (in the same order as the main `AnnData` object) and each row corresponds to an antibody derived tag (ADT).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each column corresponds to a cell or droplet (in the same order as the main `AnnData` object), and each row corresponds to an antibody derived tag (ADT).
```

Column names are again cell barcode sequences and row names are the antibody targets for each ADT.

As with the RNA `AnnData` objects, in processed objects _only_ (`_processed_adt.hdf5`), the data matrix `X` contains the normalized ADT counts and the primary data can be found in `raw.X`.

> Note that only cells which are denoted as "Keep" in  the `adata_obj.uns["adt_scpca_filter"]` column (as described [above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)) have normalized expression values in the `logcounts` assay, and all other cells are assigned `NA` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that only cells which are denoted as `"Keep"` in the `adata_obj.uns["adt_scpca_filter"]` column (as described [above](#singlecellexperiment-cell-metrics)) have normalized expression values in the `logcounts` assay, and all other cells are assigned `NA` values.
```

Reviewer: **BUT** - we're in anndata land so there is no `logcounts` assay, so this text needs to change beyond my suggestion

> However, as described in the {ref}`processed ADT data section <processing_information:Processed ADT data>`, normalization may fail under certain circumstances, in which case there will be no normalized expression matrix present in the `AnnData` object and the primary data will still be stored in `X`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, as described in the {ref}`processed ADT data section <processing_information:Processed ADT data>`, normalization may fail under certain circumstances.
In such cases the `AnnData` object will not contain a normalized expression matrix, but the primary data will still be stored in `X`.
```

> In addition, the following QC statistics from [`DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()`](https://rdrr.io/github/MarioniLab/DropletUtils/man/cleanTagCounts.html) can be found in the `obs` of the `AnnData` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the following QC statistics from [`DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()`](https://rdrr.io/github/MarioniLab/DropletUtils/man/cleanTagCounts.html) can be found in the `obs` slot of each ADT-specific `AnnData` object.
```

| Column name                | Contents                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `zero.ambient`   | Indicates whether the cell has zero ambient contamination   |
| `sum.controls` |  The sum of counts for all control features. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs are present |
| `high.controls`  | Indicates whether the cell has unusually high total control counts. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs are present |
| `ambient.scale` |  The relative amount of ambient contamination. Only present if negative control ADTs are _not_ present |
| `high.ambient`  | Indicates whether the cell has unusually high contamination. Only present if negative/isotype control ADTs are _not_ present |
| `discard`  | Indicates whether the cell should be discarded based on QC statistics |

Metrics for each of the ADTs assayed can be found as a `pandas.DataFrame` in the `.var` slot within the `AnnData` object:

> This data frame contains the following columns with statistics for each ADT:

Reviewer: i think you can delete this as duplicative with previous sentence?

```suggestion
```

| Column name | Contents                                                       |
| ----------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `mean`      | Mean ADT count across all cells/droplets                       |
| `detected`  | Percent of cells in which the ADT was detected (ADT count > 0 ) |
| `target_type` | Whether each ADT is a target (`target`), negative/isotype control (`neg_control`), or positive control (`pos_control`). If this information was not provided, all ADTs will have been considered targets and will be labeled as `target` |

Finally, additional metadata for ADT processing can be found in the `.uns` slot of the `AnnData` object.

> This metadata slot has the same contents as the [RNA experiment metadata](#anndata-experiment-metadata), along with one additional field, `ambient_profile`, which holds a list of representing the ambient concentrations of each ADT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This metadata slot has the same contents as the [RNA experiment metadata](#anndata-experiment-metadata), along with one additional field, `ambient_profile`, which holds a list of the ambient concentrations of each ADT.
```
